okay imagine there's a huge hot ball
hidden inside the earth
it's floating in an ocean of molten
metal this ball also
spins on its axis but it moves faster
than the rest of our planet
this is what the earth's core looks like
the solid metal ball is the inner core
and it's 750 miles thick that's roughly
the distance between new york and
chicago
and the whole thing is made up of hot
iron and nickel
the outer core is the molten ocean to
reach the edge of it
you'd need to dig a tunnel into the
earth that was about 3
700 miles long but you would hardly want
to go there
because it's the hottest point on the
planet the core temperature is 11 000
degrees fahrenheit
that's greater than the surface
temperature of the sun
another incredible thing about this
place the gravity at the outer core
is three times stronger than that at the
earth's surface
this means that if we could somehow find
a way to live near the core
and you threw a stone there it would
fall three times
faster than normal it would become three
times heavier
you would also become three times
heavier now that doesn't bother you so
much because
things far worse will soon happen living
conditions in the court would be the
exact
opposite of life on the international
space station and it'd be a lot harder
than living on the surface
it would be difficult for you to even
hold a fork in your hand
because of just how heavy it would feel
eating lunch would become a serious
challenge
you'd break into a sweat just from
writing with a pen on paper
or typing on a computer but if people
could ever get used to these conditions
they'd become a lot stronger humans have
learned to use the heat coming from
inside the earth as a source of energy
some companies use this energy to heat
water
which creates steam the steam is used to
power turbines that produce electricity
if the core ever cooled down and that
heat disappeared
this kind of electricity might become
very expensive
some parts of earth might become very
dark as people went back to using
candles and fires to light things up at
night
and you could forget about using your
electric car as well
because charging it up would be just too
much money
phones computers the internet all these
things would cost a lot more
but this would actually be the least of
our worries
oh just wait for it the hot core's
rotation
creates the earth's magnetic field this
field is like a shield that protects us
from the sun
and outer space if the shield disappears
solar and cosmic radiation would pass
through the atmosphere
the electricity supply would become
seriously unstable
microwaves televisions kettles traffic
lights and computers could all be
damaged
the screen of your laptop or phone would
turn on and off randomly
videos could freeze and the batteries
could run out in a second
satellites would stop working which
means there wouldn't be any gps system
to rely on anymore
say goodbye to navigating with your
phone's map
radio equipment would also stop working
so you wouldn't be able to make
calls or send messages even now when our
magnetic field is working normally
solar flares can still create magnetic
storms that disrupt electronics
and affect people's health some people
are sensitive to these storms and can
get
really bad headaches if the magnetic
field disappeared
completely every person on the planet
along with plenty of animals
will get seriously painful migraines
scientists would have to invent special
helmets that protect people from
exposure to the magnetic storms
if the core cooled down and you became
lost in a forest
it would be really difficult for you to
find your way home even with simple
equipment
without the magnetic field created by
the active core
your compass needle would no longer show
where north south
east and west were you would see the
birds in the sky going crazy
they wouldn't know what direction to fly
in for the winter because south would no
longer exist
in fact no animal would be able to
migrate anymore
in the sky the location devices on
planes would stop working
that means no more air travel until
people find a new way to navigate
but hey let's look on the bright side
because that's what we do here
you wouldn't have to go to the north
pole to see the northern lights anymore
auroras would appear in the night sky
everywhere
these occur because charred solar
particles run into the magnetic lines
stretching from north to south but these
lines will disappear if the earth's core
cools down and the particles will light
up the sky all over the world
a frozen core also means the tectonic
plates will stop moving
there will be no more earthquakes
anywhere in the world
but that's not as good as it sounds the
movement of these plates creates
faults on the earth's surface they give
us access to important minerals
with no more movement producing fuel
could become a lot harder
the price of gas might go up most people
would have to stop
driving their cars there would be a lot
more bikes and horses on the road
maybe some llamas volcanoes would also
stop
erupting if the core cools the magma
cools
people who live near large active
volcanoes would no longer need to worry
so much
but there would be a downside to this
volcanoes contain a huge amount of
useful substances and minerals
the soil around volcanoes is very
fertile which is really good for
agriculture
so more people would now have to eat
artificially created food
there would be big problems with the
supply of natural food products
only rich people might be able to afford
that classic tomato and cucumber
sandwich
but the worst thing would be the
long-term exposure to radiation
which is seriously bad for our health
more radiation
means that the risk of getting diseases
would be much higher
people would have to build special
shielding to protect themselves from
solar radiation
it would be way too expensive to cover
the whole planet with this technology
so we just create separate shields for
each city
just imagine the site of every city
covered by a huge
protective dome in this radioactive
world
movement between cities would only be
possible in special closed
transport people would need to wear
protective suits
you wouldn't be able to go to the
countryside anymore anyone still living
in a village or small town without much
funding
would be forced to live underground to
protect themselves
plants and animals would also have
problems herbs flowers and trees would
receive
huge doses of radiation and wouldn't be
able to bloom
livestock wouldn't be able to eat grass
and hay milk cheese and yogurt would be
in real short supply
plants would have trouble producing
oxygen the magnetic field
not only protects us it protects our
atmosphere
a frozen core and no magnetic shield
means that the solar wind would destroy
the atmosphere in a few hundred years
the conditions on earth would be changed
completely
humanity would no longer venture outside
his protective domes with their
artificial atmosphere
instead we'd have not only our cities
but also the last surviving pieces of
nature
are trees lakes grass meadows and
flowers
everything left outside the domes would
turn into a scorched desert
this is what happened to mars the red
planet has no seas oceans and lakes
some scientists believe it's completely
dry because its magnetic field
disappeared
with no protection mars lost most of its
atmosphere
and the sun's wind swept away all the
surface water
but of course this is just one of many
theories
this took place billions of years ago
and no one can say
exactly what happened but don't worry
our planet won't turn into mars any time
soon the earth's core is cooling very
slowly
it will take another two billion years
or so before it cools down completely
what's weird though is that our magnetic
field can be unstable even today
in the southern hemisphere there's a
spot where the magnetic field is weak
this place is called the south atlantic
anomaly
charged solar particles flow through
this spot which can cause problems for
orbiting satellites as they pass through
there are some other places like this
around the world but fortunately
they don't cause us any really big
problems good thing